There are lots of positives to being a child.
One of those positives underpins the TheraminTrees
channel icon.
The image of a floating foetus in adult clothes
— originally a tuxedo —
came from a dream in my teens.
For me, what came through in the image
was the idea of preserving the fresh unjaded
eyes we possess at birth.
For a brief time, our curiosity about the
world
is un-cluttered by dogma and tribalism.
Our minds haven’t yet been colonised
by any partisan prejudices from the communities
into which we’re randomly born.
We don’t see the bogus social divisions
constructed by certain groups
and attributed with spurious meaning.
When their assertions don’t make sense
we question them unselfconsciously.
When the answers are inadequate
we say so without inhibition.
This kind of sincere reality testing offers
us the most solid foundation
for acquiring skills, knowledge and understanding.
Not solid in terms of rigidity and inflexibility.
As a species we seem repeatedly to learn and
forget, re-learn and re-forget
that fixed dogmatic mindsets lead us down
disastrous pathways.
Solid in terms of resourcefulness.
Instead of clinging to a bogus idea
so that when it sinks, we sink with it
we’re able to adapt
—to recognise its bogus nature and step
away into new insight.
The child-like instinct to question freely
is a precious strength worth preserving.
But instead of nurturing this and other strengths
many individuals and groups try to preserve
the child’s vulnerabilities
to meet various psychological
needs of their own.
The child might be seen as a blank canvas
to be filled with all the unexamined tribal
superstitions
and traditions of previous generations and
charged
with passing them on wholesale to the next.
The child might be groomed as an enabler
trained to affirm and support the comforting
illusions of egotists.
The child might be idealised by individuals
and groups who venerate innocence
and view worldly knowledge and experience
as contaminants to what they see as a perfect
untouched state.
The child gets depersonalised into a slave,
a pet, a toy, an ornament.
Instead of being encouraged and celebrated
the child’s development is actively sabotaged
in an attempt to preserve the most vulnerable
qualities of infanthood:
ignorance, inexperience, incompetence, dependence.
The growing individual becomes infantilised.
Infantilisation is an extremely common manipulation
in which individuals are treated in ways
that deny their maturity or mental capacity.
It’s also one of the most slippery forms
of manipulation.
Unlike more overtly abusive tactics
it’s often disguised as other things,
like affection.
Infantilising abusers claim their babying
behaviour is an expression of love.
But it’s not love.
It’s a cage that gets progressively more
confining.
As their world shrinks
targets of infantilisation feel increasingly
confined and immobilised.
They anticipate failing, and not being able
to cope.
I want to explore this manipulative tactic
and some of its insidious features.
I’ll be using real-life examples, mainly
from families and religion.
But it can happen wherever power dynamics exist:
abusive one-to-one relationships, politics,
education, the workplace.
And I invite you to notice any personal parallels
in your own experience.
Our first experience of one-up one-down relationships
are the ones we’re born into.
We enter the world powerless
into the care of people who hold all the power.
People we call family.
For that first vulnerable part of our lives
they govern every aspect of our existence
from our appearance to the food we eat to
the company we keep.
Fathers and mothers are kings and queens
exercising all-encompassing sovereignty.
Older siblings, next in line to the throne
also hold significant influence.
In healthy families, this monarchy is benevolent
and fleeting.
Parents recognise they’re the temporary
guardians of their offspring
not their owners or their eternal rulers.
Their absolute power doesn’t corrupt absolutely.
It’s channelled positively into helping
the child
develop into a self-sufficient, independent
individual.
And as the child acquires knowledge and experience
the one-up one-down relationship resolves
into an equal adult relationship.
Parents remain parents in name
and bonds of love and affection continue.
But the functional role of ‘parenting’
ceases.
All parties are self-directing now, free of
any role-based remnants.
When you come from a positive family environment
like that
it’s sometimes hard to conceive of the countless
families
where parents become perpetual dictators,
lazy with power;
where roles are malignantly distorted and
children are used
to satisfy unmet needs and fantasies and act
out unresolved issues.
Adultification happens when the child is prematurely
assigned
adult roles and responsibilities they’re
not ready for.
Spousification puts the child
in a quasi-partner role
opening the door to emotional
if not physical incest.
Parentification describes a role reversal
in which the child is expected to look after
the parent.
Like all of these corruptions of the parental role
infantilisation stems from a refusal
to acknowledge the child as a fully separate
person.
Infantilisation is an assault from multiple
directions.
It manifests in a variety of ways
each one intended to erode some aspect of
the individual
that confers mature status.
One example is a refusal to acknowledge age-appropriate boundaries.
Despite 8-year-old Dominic’s repeated suggestions
that he’s old enough to bathe himself
his father continues to bathe him.
Finally Dominic takes the initiative and bathes
himself.
Finding the bathroom door locked, his father
is furious
and says if Dominic doesn’t need his help
bathing
he won’t get any more help with anything.
Dominic is subjected to a lengthy silent treatment.
This real-life example illustrates the no-win
scenario that plays out
in infantalising families, ideological groups,
and workplaces.
Targets start from an undermined position.
If they ask permission to advance,
it’s denied.
If they dare to take matters into their own
hands
and demonstrate their competence,
they're punished.
All roads point back to square one.
In healthy families, parents respect and foster
their children’s emerging desire for independence
and privacy.
Punishing children for exercising these important
boundaries
can create lasting conflicted impulses
where privacy and independence become associated
with guilt and anxiety.
35-year-old Karen is publicly scolded at a
family wedding
when her mother discovers a small dove
discreetly tattooed on her back.
Instead of asking about the deeply personal
symbolism
and learning something about Karen’s life
her mother takes it as evidence of juvenile
rebelliousness.
30-year-old Isolde’s father constantly recommends
weight loss programs
and always prescribes low-calorie food for her
when they eat together in private or public.
When she tactfully tries to sidestep his interference
he pushes the point until things get tense.
It’s as if Karen and Isolde don’t own
their own bodies.
They’re just renting them from their parental
landlords
who expect their property to be maintained
to their specification.
Because of their delusion of ownership
they misinterpret their daughters’ exercise
of bodily autonomy
as acts of personal rebellion against them.
Infantilising parents break all kinds of boundaries.
They decide who their offspring can be friends with.
They turn up at workplaces, making scenes.
They assume charge of their grandchildren
without consultation.
Honouring boundaries is one of the most basic
expressions
of respect we show other people.
It demonstrates that we recognise their fundamental
governance
over their own existence.
And it’s for that reason that crossing boundaries
without invitation
is reserved for very specific circumstances
for example when people are incapable of caring
for themselves
or where there’s a threat of harm.
And even in those cases, situations are assessed
to make sure that crossing boundaries
is genuinely justified.
When boundaries are casually ignored
it’s an act of disrespect and dominance.
The building — and maintenance — of solid
boundaries
is one of the most crucial and one of the
most difficult
aspects of overcoming infantilisation.
Later on I’ll be looking at what that involves
including some traps to avoid.
Dominic’s bath time experience illustrates
another aspect of infantilisation:
the persistent withholding of credit.
Targets’ knowledge, experience and skills
are habitually dismissed.
The assumption is they can’t do anything.
At her 30th birthday party organised by her aunt
Ingrid says she wants to take a group photo.
Her father orders her to give him the camera
— she’s bound to do it wrong.
Later, when she begins to cut her birthday cake
her father snatches the knife and takes over
telling her what a mess she’s making.
Whatever she tries to do
—open some champagne, put some music on,
organise games —
he swoops in and stops her.
Many targets of infantilisation are subjected
to relentless debilitating micromanagement.
The expected outcome is always failure.
And that expectation is used to prevent the
target from trying.
It’s a circular self-fulfilling prophecy.
Preventing targets from trying prevents them
from learning
which will tend to produce failure,
which is then used to justify preventing the target trying.
Ironically, Ingrid is a far more capable
and accomplished person than her father.
But like many targets, she’s had to acquire
all her skills and experience
elsewhere away from her abuser.
Her capabilities go unrecognised.
And on the rare times she demonstrates her
proficiency
it’s dismissed as a fluke.
In the same way, the extensive talents of
people
in infantilising religious and political groups
go untapped because their ideology considers
them
a subordinate class of human being.
They’re denied leadership roles and positions
on judging panels
and confined to menial tasks.
It’s not an unrelated fact that those groups
are often run by incompetent twits.
Sometimes, the withholding of credit is falsely
wrapped up as concern.
In his mid-20s, Nikolai flies out to a holiday
resort
to meet his parents for a vacation.
On his first morning he says he’s going
for a swim in the sea.
His mother descends into histrionics
insisting his father chaperones the strong
swimmer in case he drowns.
Eventually, to placate her, the two men walk
down to the beach
where Nikolai has a joyless swim
conscious of his father’s resentment — and
his own.
It’s a grindingly familiar experience.
Nikolai’s mother justifies her constant
demeaning interventions
with an air of maternal martyrdom
claiming ‘I can’t help fussing. I’m
a mother!’
But while she endlessly fusses, she never
actually helps.
In fact she’s been conspicuously out of
sync
with Nikolai’s needs ever since he was born.
As he’ll eventually discover, she has a
malignant personality disorder
and never felt anything approaching maternal
love.
Which is why her so-called assistance only
ever created problems;
and why whenever real help was needed
she always made excuses and a swift exit.
Her bouts of infantilising fussing were just
cartoonish performances
of what she thought maternal love looked like.
Aside from trying to extract affirmation for
herself for being a doting mother
these performances highlight another element
of infantilisation
found in many areas of abuse.
Targets are trained to fear the outside world.
Members of religious organisations are warned
that the world is in the grip of evil supernatural
entities.
Political ideologues are taught to view non-members
as either malevolent or enablers of malevolence.
Citizens are whipped into divisive paranoia
by corrupt governments.
Instilling fear is designed to draw targets
close
with the message ‘I’ll keep you safe’;
to encourage the voluntary surrender of freedoms
and discourage targets from exploring a world
they might find complex, beautiful and engaging.
As a result, members of religious and political
groups
cloister themselves in likeminded bubbles
blocking and shunning dissenting opinions.
Citizens offer limitless personal data to
governments and corporate giants
with child-like trust, believing their best
interests will be served.
And children grow up having never known an
unsupervised moment
or been allowed to develop age-appropriate
self-management skills
including the ability to deal with conflict
without appealing to external authorities
to intervene and dispense justice.
The persistent diminishing nature of infantilisation
distinguishes it from authentic protectiveness
and concern.
Healthy parents don’t diminish their offspring.
Healthy partners don’t diminish their mates.
They don’t use their loved ones’ failures
to shame them
or disqualify them from further attempts.
They understand that working through failure
is how we develop.
Healthy groups don’t restrict contact with
non-members.
They understand that other perspectives
—including critical perspectives —
can, like failure, be an important source
of growth.
The abusive nature of infantilising protectiveness
also reveals itself in the actions taken
against people who try to opt out of it.
Responses of emotional blackmail, smear campaigns,
shunning, silencing, even threats of violence
make it clear who targets really needed to
protect themselves from.
Another infantilising tactic that masquerades
as something positive is perpetual wallowing
in an idealised past.
Whenever 36-year old Ty speaks with his mother
she embarks on the same long-winded script.
In a bedtime story voice,
she rehashes vaseline-lensed memories
she’s recounted hundreds of times about
his early childhood.
The stories are littered with the same one-liners:
‘Why did you have to grow up?’
‘You’ll always be my little baby.’
Ty recalls none of these old memories
and hearing them endlessly repeated
leaves him feeling disconnected and claustrophobic.
It’s as if his life stopped when he was
three years old
at the start of what his mother calls his
‘difficult years’
ie when he began developing an independent
personality.
They were certainly difficult for Ty
whose growing independence was met
with rages, silence treatments and exclusion
including being banished
from the house for hours
and left to roam the streets.
Decades later, still unwilling to acknowledge
her son
as an independent person,
she continues to try
and drag him back to those first three years
when she felt like the centre of his universe.
Many abusers repeatedly hark back to a few
scant good times
to try and block out the years of abuse that
truly characterise the relationship
and immerse the target in a haze of artificial
wistfulness.
A sober assessment of just how few good times
there actually were
will give a fair indication of just how few
good times there are to come.
With infantilisation, memories of helplessness
and vulnerability
are specifically selected to put the target
back in that psychological state.
Another common strand of infantilisation
is that the target’s sexuality is denied
or obstructed.
When Leo and his partner are invited
to spend the weekend at his parents’ house
his father tells him they’ll have to sleep
separately.
No other couples get treated this way.
Sleeping arrangements during family visits
are a battleground for many folks.
Adults are treated like unruly adolescents
and barred from sleeping with their own partners.
Controlling religious and pseudoscience groups
often try to impede or eliminate sexuality
among their members.
Masturbation is frequently forbidden.
Leaders of groups like the Jehovah’s Witnesses
and the Mormons
have presumed to dictate to married couples
what kinds of sex they can and can’t have.
These invasions are designed to teach targets
that even in the most private aspects
of their relationships and their bodies
they remain under royal rulership.
In working with clients like Leo
who’ve experienced parental intrusion on
their sexuality,
I’ve presented the following hypothetical.
Imagine that whenever you visit your parents
before you’re allowed to enter, you and
your partner
have to consent to them slapping you both
round the face.
How likely would you be to visit them?
Invariably the answer is: not very likely.
The next question is:
How does that differ from what your parents
are already doing?
Parents who insist on separate beds for their
offspring and partners
are telling them their relationship is invalid;
that there’s something unacceptable about it
that disqualifies it from respect.
When offspring submit to these intrusions
they’re tacitly validating their own invalidation.
They’re allowing themselves and their partners
to be slapped round the face.
It’ll always be up to offspringand their
partners
to decide what intrusions they’re prepared
to tolerate
from their parents and partner’s parents.
Just as employees have to decide what intrusions
they tolerate from their employers;
citizens from their governments;
religious followers from their religious leaders.
But the consequences of giving in to invalidating
power plays
are not to be underestimated.
When we act like submissive children
our emotions and thoughts follow.
We feel and think like submissive children.
We regress to a meek one-down
permission-seeking position
hoping for respect rather than expecting it.
As we become smaller, we become more vulnerable
to further encroachment.
Likewise, when we respond as adults
we feel and think like adults.
We operate from an equal position
and we’re clear  about the respect
we’re entitled to from loved ones.
Prior to his visit, Leo gave his father
some chances to reconsider his position.
Three times he stated he and his partner would
expect to sleep together.
After his father’s third rejection of the idea
Leo informed him they wouldn’t be visiting.
When Leo’s resolve became clear
his father had a rethink and accepted his terms.
Leo avoided some common traps
targets fall into
when they’re building boundaries
with infantilising people.
One trap is to try to argue their case with
the infantilising individual
or explain why they deserve respect.
It’s not up to targets to come up with reasons
why they should be treated with basic consideration.
A variation of this trap is bargaining for respect.
Some targets try offering some concession
or compromise
to gain basic consideration.
But that just keeps them in a one-down position
giving respect freely but paying for the respect
they receive.
Another trap is bluffing.
When targets lay out what’ll happen if they’re
mistreated
they need to be prepared to follow through
with those consequences.
To be taken seriously, targets need
to be serious.
A final trap worth mentioning is losing control.
Frustrating as it is to be infantilised
lashing out just lives down to expectations
and feeds into the child-like image that’s
already being peddled.
Anger is an extremely useful emotional fuel
when it’s harnessed and focussed.
And for many targets it plays a huge part
in ending their abuse.
It can galvanise us; sustain our determination.
There’s even evidence it can sharpen our
information-processing skills.
In their 2007 paper ‘Thinking straight while
seeing red’
Wesley Moons and Diane Mackie found that angry
individuals
were more likely to discriminate between weak
and strong arguments
than individuals in neutral moods
and that anger encouraged analytical processing
even in individuals who didn’t have strong
analytical predispositions.
But when anger runs wild
its constructive potential collapses into
destructive potential
which can backfire on the target.
All these traps spring from
the same basic mistake.
Targets are over-valuing their abusers’ respect.
By chasing their respect, they give their
abusers a hold over them.
When targets turn their focus inward on their
own self-respect
there’s often a natural shift.
They stop behaving like second-class citizens
and start occupying their full adult space.
In milder cases where there’s no deep pathology
a bit of sustained adult resistance
can sometimes shake
infantilising individuals out of their misguided
behaviour
—although it’s worth preparing for some
subsequent backsliding
and doubling down in some cases.
But at the malignant end, where individuals
and groups
are entrenched in deeply disordered
power fantasies
it’s time to think about creating serious
personal distance
— reducing or terminating contact.
In many religions
—certainly the Abrahamic ones —
infantilisation is intrinsically woven into
the central divine concept.
The god character described in scriptural
creation myths
designs an immeasurably inferior species called
human beings
who are prevented from ever attaining
the god’s knowledge, skills or understanding.
Humans are kept in deliberate ignorance
and obliged to obey without comprehension.
The Biblical creation myth frames this diminished
infantilised state
as perfection, purity, innocence.
This innocent state is venerated as the pinnacle
of human existence.
That innocence is then despicably abused.
In the creation myth, the god character makes
a garden paradise called Eden
and creates the first man,
Adam, to look after it.
He then creates the first woman, Eve, to be
Adam’s helper.
The pair of them are left to wander round
the garden
where they’re allowed to eat the fruit of
any tree.
With a bizarre exception.
The god character chooses the garden of Eden
as the location for two magic trees:
the tree of life and the tree of the knowledge
of good and evil.
He directs Adam and Eve not to eat from the
second of these
warning them they’ll die when they do.
But everything’s okay.
He’s created them innocent
— ie, ignorant, inexperienced and obedient.
What could go wrong?
Well, just about everything.
A talking serpent, described variously as
subtle, crafty and cunning
tells the innocent Eve she won’t die if
she eats the fruit.
Instead, she’ll become wise
like the god character.
She eats — and persuades Adam to eat.
And true to the serpent’s word, they don’t
dieand they gain wisdom.
As a sign of their lost innocence, they dress
themselves in leaves.
The god character then punishes them for disobedience
casting them from Eden before they can eat
the fruit of the other magic tree
— the tree of life, which would give them
immortality.
This creation myth illustrates why innocence
is not something to be venerated.
Adam and Eve were presented with conflicting
statements
which they weren’t equipped to process.
When the serpent said they wouldn’t die
he meant the mere act of eating the fruit
wouldn’t instantly kill them.
When the god character said they’d die when
they ate from the tree
he meant he would personally enforce their
eventual death.
In fact it was his deliberately misleading
phrasing
that caused the whole problem.
We can safely call it deliberately misleading
because, being an all-knowing deity,
he would’ve known
how Adam and Eve would misinterpret it.
He would’ve known that if he’d simply
told them
he would cast them out and let them die
the serpent’s statement wouldn’t’ve
conflicted with his.
And of course he knew they had no capacity
to process the conflicting information they
were given.
They were punished for failing a test they
were designed to fail.
The failure lies completely with the god character.
If he wanted to preserve human innocence
it was his job to create an environment
where it would never be jeopardised.
In Biblical mythology, the omnipotent, omniscient
god character
was perfectly capable of creating that environment
if he’d really wanted to.
Having just created an entire universe
he could’ve placed his magic trees out of
reach on some distant planet.
In fact there’s no explanation for why they
even had to exist.
He could’ve made humans unable to communicate
with anyone but him.
If he wanted to preserve their ignorance
he could’ve created them without curiosity.
For an all-knowing all-powerful deity
there’d be many simple and obvious measures
to avoid jeopardising human innocence.
The fact none of those measures were employed
indicates stupidity, incompetence, negligence
or active sadism.
Unlike the mythical god of the Bible
humans don’t have the magical power
to engineer environments where innocence can
be sustained.
And yet many still venerate innocence
still work to preserve it in their children
and still punish them for worldly knowledge.
The disastrous result is that countless children
who are kept in a state of ignorance and inexperience
are left wide open to exploitation
— a prime example being children
who are given
no knowledge of sex or sexuality
and become easy prey for molesters.
This combination of denying sexuality
and venerating innocence is particularly poisonous.
At school, one of 14-year-old Jasmine’s
friends
brings in one of her mother’s old copies
of Playgirl.
They giggle at the pictures of the men.
Jasmine’s friend tears off a page for her
to keep.
She hides it under her bed.
Coming back from school one day she finds
the picture gone.
Later, her mother comes in
brandishing the picture.
She cuts it in two, tears up the body and
saves the head.
She threatens to show it to Jasmine’s father
— let him know what
a depraved little girl she is.
She continues to dangle that threat over her
daughter
keeping Jasmine suspended in a limbo of shame,
fear and anxiety.
The blackmail only stops
when her mother inadvertently reveals
where she keeps the photo and Jasmine musters
the courage to destroy it.
Many years later, having grappled with severe
trust and shame issues
Jasmine reminded her mother about that period
of blackmail in her teens.
Her mother said she just couldn’t stand
the fact her baby was growing up.
She wanted Jasmine to stay her sweet little
girl forever.
Another big motif infantilising families and
religions share
is the practice of trying to instil a permanent
sense of debt.
Some parents try to extract gratitude with
the line: ‘I gave you life!’
As if they did you some favour.
They didn’t.
Before you were conceived, you weren’t some
potential person
waiting in the wings, hoping for life.
There was no ‘you’.
Your birth wasn’t a gift to you.
It was your parents’ gift to themselves.
They gave themselves a child.
To demand gratitude for a gift you give yourself
is absurd.
Infantilising religions teach followers to
prostrate themselves
in gratitude to their gods for giving them life.
But again, if any of those gods existed
there’d be nothing to thank them for.
In Abrahamic mythology, the god character
doesn’t give the human race life.
He gives himself a human race to rule over.
He gives himself an empire.
An act of birth or creation is nothing to
be grateful for.
It’s a completely self-serving act on the
part of the parent.
It’s what parents do for their children
once they’re born that counts.
And even then, many of the things often characterised
as gifts
to the child are actually parental duties.
It’s no gift to children
to feed them, clothe them,
shelter them, protect them, nurture them.
Those are just basic responsibilities the
parents took on
when they decided to have children.
And even these bare essentials aren’t fulfilled
by any god characters
who are conspicuous in their absence.
Gifts by definition are given freely.
Trying to instil a sense of permanent debt
proves there are no parental gifts
being bestowed here.
It also indicates a very manipulative mindset.
In healthy relationships, people don’t try
to trap each other
with guilt, obligation and debt.
They stick around because they like each other.
I’ll end with one more feature: the use
of belittling language.
Targets are often addressed with juvenile
pet names
or terms that insinuate immaturity —like
‘young man’ or ‘young woman’.
As with other aspects of infantilisation,
behaviour determines context.
When the actions are friendly and respectful,
there’s no sting.
When the actions are patronising and diminishing,
the words become charged.
In religious groups infantilising language
is sometimes formally built into job titles.
Congregations like the Christian one I was
forced into as a child
are taught to address priests as ‘Father’
— an explicitly infantilising term.
The perversity of this parent-child dynamic
is highlighted
when elderly parishioners
call young priests ‘Father’.
I personally avoided using this title.
I called our priests ‘the vicar’.
The title ‘Father’ seemed creepy for reasons
I couldn’t pinpoint at the time.
I can pinpoint them now.
I was being directed to relate to these total
strangers like I was their son
bypassing the establishment of any personal
relationships
or the building of any trust.
Just like it was with the heavenly father
those things were expected to magically snap
into existence from nothing.
They didn’t.
We mess around with some
very important survival instincts
when we try to shortcut children’s natural
caution around strangers.
Some religious scripture
descends into animalistic imagery
comparing followers to flocks of sheep
presided over by shepherds.
As a child I remember recoiling
from this insulting image.
But in retrospect it was a lot more apt than
parent-child language.
Shepherds don’t look after sheep out of
kindness or love.
They look after sheep so long as they’re
useful
— in the sheep’s case, useful for wool,
meat and profit.
The truth of this metaphor has been experienced
by millions of people reared in religious
communities
who learned their value was conditional on
their utility
and who discovered that those surrogate families
who ‘lovingly protected’ them from knowledge
and experience
were happy to cut them dead in a heartbeat
when their usefulness expired.
Infantilisation often comes disguised
as love, affection, playfulness, protection.
But when those things are genuine
they don’t leave us feeling suffocated,
debilitated, paralysed.
They don’t leave us dependent, anxious and
neurotic.
If we’re feeling any of those things, it’s
time for a reality check.
We don’t get to choose the company we’re
born into.
But we do get to choose the company we keep.
In most of the real-life cases recounted here
the infantilised offspring eventually claimed
their freedom
implementing no contact or minimal contact
with rigorous boundaries.
A couple of individuals struggled to translate
their awareness into action
and continued to allow draining levels of
contact with their abusive parents.
Infantilised targets often
put up with excessive demands
for contact from their abusers
—exhausting daily phone calls
and over-extended visits.
They’ve been trained to give abusers as
much of their personal time
as the abusers want, whenever they want it.
Limiting contact often facilitates lots of
other positive changes.
With strong time boundaries in place
abusers have fewer chances to violate other
boundaries
because the target isn’t there.
Time apart can help to shed old infantilised habits
and strengthen new adult ones.
Many targets wrestle with the question of
how much contact is reasonable.
Is a five-minute phone call too short?
Is fifteen minutes more reasonable?
This kind of overthinking by targets reflects
their anticipation of being judged.
To get out of that frame of mind
it’s useful for targets to get into the
habit of imagining
how they’d answer if they were guaranteed
no judgement.
So, if you knew you weren’t going to be
judged for it
how much contact would you want to have with
this person?
Whatever answer you give is reasonable.
Framing questions in this way reveals our
real feelings.
Being on guard against the manipulative tactic
of infantilisation
doesn’t mean we have to put away
all childish things.
We’re the sum of all our experiences
— experiences in our childhood, our adolescence
and our adulthood.
There’s nothing unhealthy about fondly revisiting
the games, books, TV and films we enjoyed
in our childhood.
The music for this video is a choral version
of a piece I’ve loved
ever since I heard it on a tinny old cassette
player when I was five:
Camille Saint-Saëns’s ‘The cuckoo in
the depths of the woods’.
Growing up isn’t about giving up our past,
but expanding on it.
Being stretched and enriched by experience.
There’s nothing unhealthy about enjoying
child-like affection
and playfulness in our adult relationships.
The problem arises when the relationship operates
coercively on that child-like level.
Becoming aware of the subtle slippery elements
of that coercion
and recognising the difference between care
and confinement
are the first steps in breaking free from
the cage of infantilisation.